# Basics of Matrix

Matrix is 2 dimensional vector.

It can be formed by combining one or more column/row vectors.

We generally use capital letter symbol to denote matrix, for example $A$

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix}a_{11} & ... & a_{1n}\\
... & ... & ...\\
a_{m1} & ... & a_{mn}\\
\end{bmatrix}
$$

A is an example of $m\times n$ matrix. It has `m rows` and `n columns`. Convention is $row \times column$

Geometrically, matrix represents the transformation. When a vector is multiplied by a matrix, we can say vector is transformed by the matrix.

## Matrix basic operations

### Adding two matrix

Add corresponding elements from each matrix

Matrix must be of same size.

游릭 NOTE 游릭 **programming languages like pythons allows adding different size matrices by extrapolating missing values by the process called `broadcasting`**.

### Matrix multiplication (Cross Multiplication)

Matrix of M x N means M rows and N columns

We can multiply two matrix if the rows in first matrix matches the columns in the second matrix.

The resulting matrix will have same number of rows as in matrix 1 and same number of columns as in matrix 2.

that is

We can multiple [M x N] and [N x O] (`the inner numbers N match`)
and the result will be [M x O] matrix (`the outer numbers`)

游릭 NOTE 游릭 **think of water falls, the length of first and depth of second must match**

Geometrically, multiplying two vectors means we are composing two linear transformation into one. This is called `linear composition`

#### Row view

when we multiply matrix think of them in the following way

$$\begin{bmatrix} a & b \\
c & d \\
\end{bmatrix} \times \begin{bmatrix} r_{1i} & r_{1j} \\
r_{2i} & r_{2j} \\
\end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} a.r_{1i} + b.r_{2i} & a.r_{1j} + b.r_{2j} \\
c.r_{1i} + d.r_{2i} & c.r_{1j} + d.r_{2j} \\
\end{bmatrix}$$

here we are

* taking `a` times row 1 and adding that with `b` times row 2 to get resulting row 1
* and then taking `c` times row 1 and adding that with `d` times row 2 to get resulting row 2

#### Properties

* not commutative - A x B != B x A

#### Einstein-summation

Computation of m x j and j x k matrix can be simplified as follows

$$
C_{ik} = (AB)_{ik} = \sum_{j=1}^N A_{ij}B_{jk}
$$

that is
for a value at `ik` in `C` we loop through all the j and add them all.

this process is computationally efficient and can be accomplished using 3 nested loops.

This notation is called `Einstein summation` notation

### Matrix Vector Multiplication

Matrix vector multiplication is not different from matrix multiplication. It is just that one of the matrix (in this case the second matrix) is N x 1, that is N row and 1 column

We can see this in different perspective from system of linear equations.

For example,

3a + b = 8

a - 2b = 5

can be written as following in row view

$$ \begin{bmatrix} 3 & 1 \\
1 & -2 \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} a \\
b \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} 8 \\ 5
\end{bmatrix}$$

and can be written as following in **column view**

$$ a . \begin{bmatrix} 3 \\
1 \end{bmatrix} + b . \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\
-2 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} 8 \\
5 \end{bmatrix} $$

this is just a scaled `linear combination` of two vectors (lets call them x and y) is the result vector.


## Augmented Matrices

System of linear equations can be written as augmented matrix

For example,

3a + b = 8

a - 2b = 5

can be written as

$$\begin{bmatrix} 3 & 1 &\bigm| &8 \\
1 & -2 &\bigm| &5\\
\end{bmatrix}$$

once we have this augmented matrix, we can apply series of row operations to each rows to find `a` and `b`.

* the row operations can be

  * scalar multiplication and division (scale up or down)

  * add or subtract one row from another (add non-zero scalar multiples of rows)
  * swap rows

* the row operations CANNOT be
  * adding or subtracting scalar values
  * dividing one row by another (not sure what it would even mean 游땏)

The goal is to get the coefficient to 1 in one of row's `a` position and make other values to be zero and repeat this for all the unknowns. So the above matrix will reduce to

$$\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 &\bigm| &3 \\
0 & 1 &\bigm| &-1\\
\end{bmatrix}$$

so we know a = 3 and b = -1

This method is called `Gaussian Elimination`

We first get to a form of a matrix were lower triangle of the matrix is zero. This matrix is called `Row Echelon Form`. Once we get to this form, then it is very easy to find the unknowns.

example of `Row Echelon Form` (not a real example)

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 5 & 3 &\bigm| &8 \\
0 & 4 & 2 &\bigm| &-3\\
0 & 0 & 3 &\bigm| &14\\
\end{bmatrix}
$$

## References

1. [Video Explanation of Augmented matrix](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sza_BKR2KFc&list=PL5KkMZvBpo5C6yh94U8m_9TL6MplIK9RZ)

2. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einstein_notation>
